---
layout: post
title: "Shrink your identity; expand it"
date: 2024-9-11 06:22:22 -0400
categories: philosophy
tags: philosophy
usemathjax: true
---

*A reason to keep your identity small and a reason to expand it.*

Paul Graham's [Keep Your Identity Small](https://paulgraham.com/identity.html) is one of my favorite essays. The world made more sense to me after I read it and I started pruning parts of my identity. In short, Graham argues that when people identify with something (e.g. a programming language), they feel that an attack on or argument against the thing is a personal attack against themself. It becomes impossible for them to change their mind evaluate whether claims are true.

However, I think there's another reason to keep your identity small that Graham didn't mention: the things you identify with can change, and if one changes, you're stuck identifying with it. For example, the viewpoints of political parties change over time (the positions of Republicans and Democrats are radically different than what they were in the civil war era), and often due to reasons unrelated to beliefs about what is true or best for the country, but rather to [garner more votes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Southern_strategy). In fact, individual politicians change their mind all the time to get more votes. Yet it seems silly to change your mind every time your favorite politician changes their mind. If this happens slowly enough, you might not even feel your views changing at all — after all, it feels like you have not changed your identity one bit. But looking back, it turns out that you identify with something you would not have endorsed. This has happened to at least one person close to me.

If you don't identify with things, you don't have to worry about your identity being pulled to change as those things change.

Yet over the past two years, I realized that identifying with something had *expanded* my freedom. I've always liked to explore the world and go hiking. When I hike, I o

TODO okay this is just better https://zenhabits.net/identity/
